{Number = 005}
{Type = Translation}
{Title = Táaxʼaa / Mosquito}
{OriginalTitle = The Origin of the Mosquitoes}
{Author = Stoowuḵáa / Louis Shotridge}
{Clan = Kaagwaantaan, G̱ooch Hít; G̱aanax̱teidí yádi}
{Source = Boas 1917:168–179}
{Translator = Franz Boas, Stoowuḵáa / Louis Shotridge}
{Note = Numbering continues from first page rather than the original per page.}
{Page = 168}
1	Foreign tribe lived. Their midst in that some one moved a certain
2 	strange being. Since then beginning walking from not person like he was.
3	Even his mother also not anything like her about his mind was. Always
4	things butts inside at walking always squirrels and birds little killing. While
5	becoming big like that gradually he camped among butts inside. What was that
6	him with they walked little boys, without home he went. “Where with you
7	the one however?” his mother questioned him. Only “I don’t know” that one
8	maintained. Quietly that one gradually again disappeared
9	little boy. Gradually again he disappeared. That little strange being again
10	gradually the time getting longer at butts inside. His maternal uncles four of them were.
11	They however then they were suspicious of their nephew. Nevertheless that
12	his mother not gave up her son. While quietly sitting (pl.) that lynx
{Page = 169}
13	into house he carried it. At one time his mother very her inside happy
14	her little son for. His uncles they however that him suspected. Finished
15	eating that his mother this front said: “My little son why very not
16	that man’s head has been washed? Put it here, thy head I’ll search.” How
17	man’s mother caresses that like that towards her its head carried her little son.
18	Right its head to she was touching with that her chest. Head struck her. “Away!
19	very excessively me you love.” Then suddenly back fell that woman,
20	that Tsʼaxéechkʼi however then outside to ran. Behold! Right there
21	her chest on ground is there certain flint arrow mouthpieces. Then never more
22	she breathed. Right then that his small head in grew certain flint that
23	Tsʼaxéechkʼi. Then his mother he had killed her from he however then not
24	again was seen. Just a short time like that radually persons
25	large hunters also not hither walked. Nearly somewhere from disappeared
26	those together walked mutual relatives one only hither walked. He himself
27	that with another he told it: “Tsʼaxéechkʼi from they disappear those
28	town sitters.” As soon as from it was learned inside that moved off that
29	foreign tribe. Then from this not on ground we moved camp. Very mutual
{Page = 170}
30	relatives due like were that as it were together went
31	those four being Tsʼaxéechkʼi’s uncles. Also together they
32	moved camp. Then they living from that together eye
33	in the way of they around used to make smoke-signals. Still we are living thus.
34	One still morning as soon as he made a smoke-signal that very youngest his elder brothers
35	smoke for he looked. Behold! Only two those on ground through stood up.
36	Then inside he went that his wife with he told: “I missed
37	their smoke. At once do! their mouths into something put those
38	children.” At once then that day that then back hill inside to
39	they dug. After that night they changed about their children over them finishing
40	they guarded. After that when daylight came only one indeed this past surface from
41	standing his brothers’ smoke. Then towards end digging while this
42	his wife however celery withered on top of one another while she carried it. Finishing he dug
43	this their sand inside house. Again another one inside he dug. Before
44	night came then their children mouths finished they fed them. From then
45	while his wife this celery withered on surface was spreading that that man
46	however their likeness it something tried. Then finish to as night came with
{Page = 171}
47	this his children with finishing what he made room into his wife he sent.
48	Outer room under that he built a fire. This fire around then he put them,
49	these person likenesses made grass finished that his wife
50	near to inland (into her room) went. This room mouth hole at (at door) they hung a gopher
51	blanket. They tore it; through it they could see their door hole..
52	His wife for a while finishing, watched, night in middle from that her husband.
53	Before anything he saw this then dawn came. Then daylight coming
54	with this outside there went this man. His brothers’ smoke for then
55	he looked. Not at all it through up it blew. At once this he made a smoke-signal.
56	No, not in return smoke-signal he saw. “Oh! he has already been killed my brother,”
57	that he thought. Then into house going with this his wife with he told,
58	“Not he made smoke-signal mine in return; already some one killed perhaps my brother.”—
59	“Keep up your curage, do, my little children,” this word with this instructing them
60	what to they fall into line, if they should escape. Something it is usually like other tribe
61	children as soon as cradle on from then different things likeness they become always.
{Page = 172}
62	That one’s likeness this they are these children. They themselves they something
63	kill something to shoot they are skilled. Therefore not very in mind troubled
64	his children this man. Very well he knew (had) to hem (time) had come.
65	All this day never he moved about everything to end
66	doing. Night before then to end night coming with this again
67	into it they went this sand inside house. Then at once slept this man.
68	His wife however then finished guarded. Then at night middle sleep
69	on her was. Then her husband she pushed: “Do get up!” Then straight up
70	he sat this man. Before long time this sleep struck her his wife.
71	This fire well he made. Very at once this again their room on through
72	again inward he went. Just then not between long this he heard this
73	celery withered being shaken. Then at once that he was ready. He watched
74	that gopher blanket torn through, that through into house something was about to go.
75	“Not it will appear those withered ones among going,” that he thought.
76	A little while not expecting that, to here some one lifted their entrance they
77	hung thing. Behold! Only through that inside face moved his little nephew.
78	Then that larger grass bundle towards that its mouth he directed his little arrow.
{Page = 173}
79	Then he spanned it with that that little thing his bow on thong. That
80	man also then his little nephew his armpit to he mouth directed his right
81	his armpit hole to. That he let it go. “Oh!” he sounded that little thing,
82	ended. Then not he saw it that man. Then when it began to dawn with
83	that outside out they went its foot place after they looked for it.
84	Behold! then their door from where that dripped blood. “When were seen
85	what I struck something foot place under not even I always lack courage
86	its place to I shall go,” his wife he said to her that man. Still not beginning
87	with his going his wife he instructed: “Severly I wounded it, with that
88	do not your mind trouble about me. Very two (days) stay do, then my place to
89	go, and now and again look my smoke for.” That from that
90	then beginning he tracked that little thing foot place. Continually he walked,
91	for that not with seeing. here and there was time it was that very much
92	blood he saw it its foot places little under in. All that day
93	he tracked it. Then it became dark only he camped. Then this dawn coming
94	in it that he heard a certain Kag̱eet voice: “Ho.ó ho.ó ho.ó.” Then
{Page = 174}
95	upright (he sat?). Then again he listened. Still continuing to listen
96	that on it he saw a certain small lake. When through towards it that
97	also he heard that Kag̱eet another(?). It became dawn not that
98	uttered a sound Kag̱eet. Therefore he suspected that something’s voice then
99	at once that to its side out ran. Then that mountain foot that
100	with his reaching it that together he heard that sound. “What may it be?”
101	he thought. Then that little lake edge out he went that he saw
102	a certain Kag̱eet eating like he thought. Strangely acting
103	that then he approached already near him hiding that he heard
104	“Oh, again go! me also bring the last your uncle for murdering.”
105	Behold! his little nephew who stone on lying, two Kag̱eet
106	at his side hung with their mouths. Then that Kag̱eet with making noise that
107	on out he carried it. Then his club he raised up that,
108	“Wait a while.” that he said to him. “My uncle, wait, don’t me kill.”
109	Then his little hands he raised. “There are my caches and there and
110	there,” among them he pointed (not I know their names). “All thy
111	material. Now go on! me kill!” Then to end when he talked that
112	he struck his head. Already that Kag̱eet spirit out they sucked on surface
{Page = 175}
113	almost that arrow mouth he discovered(?). Then at once that under wood
114	together he piled. On it finished he laid him that under
115	he lighted it. Very it had burnt, that he extinguished it under it fire
116	this its smoke together he was gathering that then ashes became.
117	This very surprised him, that he blew on it; then that at it
118	little lake on falling at that that those ashes however then mosquitoes
119	they became. This still Tsʼaxeechkʼi’s ashes these now people eat.
